CHAPTER II I resisted all the way, a new thing for me,
and a circumstance which greatly strengthened the bad opinion Bessie and Miss Abbott were
entertain of me. The fact is, I was a trifle beside myself, or rather out of myself, as
the French would say. I was conscious that a moment's mutiny had already rendered me liable
to strange penalties, and like any other rebel slave, I felt resolved in my desperation to go
all lengths. Hold her at arms, Miss Abbott, she's like a mad cat. For shame, for shame,
cried the lady's maid. What shocking conduct, Miss Eyre, to strike a young gentleman, your
benefactress's son, your young master. Master, how is he my master? Am I a servant? No, you
are less than a servant, for you do nothing for your keep. There, sit down and think over
your wickedness. They had got me by this time into the apartment indicated by Mrs. Reed,
and had thrust me upon a stool. My first impulse was to rise from it like a spring. Their two
pair of hands arrested me instantly.
"'If you don't sit still, you must be tied down,' said Bessie. Miss Abbott lend me your
garters, for she will break mine directly.' Miss Abbott turned to divest a stout leg of
the necessary ligature. This preparation for bonds, and the additional ignominy it inferred,
took a little of the excitement out of me. Don't take them off, I cried. I will not stir.
In guarantee whereof, I attached myself to the seat by my hands.
"'Mind you don't,' said Bessie. When she had ascertained that I was really subsiding, she
loosened her hold of me. Then she and Miss Abbott stood with folded arms, looking darkly
and doubtfully on my face, as incredulous of my sanity. She never did so before. At
last, said Bessie, turning to Abigail, "'But it was always in her,' was the reply. I've
told Mrs. often my opinion about the child, and Mrs. agrees with me. She's an underhanded
little thing. I never saw a girl of her age so much cover.' Bessie answered not, but air
long addressing me, she said, "'You ought to be aware, Miss, that you are under obligation
to Mrs. Reed. She keeps you. If she were to turn you out, you would have to go to the
poorhouse.' I had nothing to say to these words. They were not new to me. My very first
recollections of existence included hints of the same kind. This reproach of my dependence
had become a vague sing-song in my ear, very painful and crushing, but only half intelligible.
Miss Abbott joined in, "'And you ought to not think yourself an equal with the Mrs.
Reed and Master Reed, because Mrs. kindly allows you to be brought up with them. They
will have a great deal of money and you will have none. It is your place to be humble and
to try to make yourself agreeable to them.' "'What we tell you is for your own good,'
added Bessie in no harsh voice. "'You should try to be useful and pleasant. Then perhaps
you would have a home here. But if you become passionate and rude, Mrs. will send you away,
and I'm sure.' "'Besides,' said Miss Abbott, "'God will punish her. He might strike her
dead in the midst of her tantrums, and then where would she go? Come, Bessie, we will
leave her. I wouldn't have her heart for anything. Say your prayers, Miss Eyre, when you are
by yourself, for if you don't repent, something bad might be permitted to come down the chimney
and fetch you away.' They went, shutting the door and locking it behind them.
The Red Room was a square chamber, very seldom slept in. I might say never indeed, unless
when a chance influx of visitors at Gateshead Hall rendered it necessary to turn to account
all the accommodation it contained. Yet it was one of the largest and stateliest chambers
in the mansion. A bed supported on massive pillars of mahogany, hung with curtains of
deep red damask, stood out like a tabernacle in the center. The two large windows with
their blinds always drawn down were half shrouded in festoons and falls of similar drapery.
The carpet was red. The table at the foot of the bed was covered with a crimson cloth.
The walls were a soft fawn color with a blush of pink in it. The wardrobe, the toilet table,
the chairs were of darkly polished old mahogany. Out of these surrounding shades rose high
and glared white the piled up mattresses and pillows of the bed, spread with a snowy white
Marcel's counterpane. Scarcely less prominent was an ample cushioned easy chair near the
head of the bed, also white with a footstool before it, and looking, as I thought, like
a pale throne. This room was chill because it seldom had a fire. It was silent because
it was remote from the nursery and kitchen. Solemn because it was known to be so seldom
entered. The housemaid alone came here on Saturdays to wipe from the mirrors and the
furniture a week's quiet dust, and Mrs. Reed herself at far intervals visited it to review
the contents of a certain secret drawer in the wardrobe, where were stored divers' parchments,
her jeweled casket, and a miniature of her deceased husband, and in those last words
lies the secret of the red room, the spell which kept it so lonely in spite of its grandeur.
Mr. Reed had been dead nine years. It was in this chamber he breathed his last. Here
he lay in state, hence his coffin was borne by the undertaker's men, and since that day,
in a sense of dreary consecration, had guarded it from frequent intrusion. My seat, to which
and the bitter Miss Abbott had left me riveted, was a low ottoman near the marble chimney
piece. The bed rose before me. To my right hand there was a high dark wardrobe, with
subdued broken reflections varying the gloss of its panels. To my left were the muffled
windows. A great looking glass between them repeated the vacant majesty of the bed and
room. I was not quite sure whether they had locked the door, and when I dared move I got
up and went to see. Alas, yes, no jail was ever more secure. Returning, I had to cross
before the looking glass. My fascinated glance involuntarily explored the depth it revealed.
All looked colder and darker in that visionary hollow than in reality, and the strange little
figure there gazing at me, with a white face and arms speckled the gloom, and the glittering
eye of fear moving where all else was still, had the effect of a real spirit. I thought
it like one of those tiny phantoms, half fairy, half imp, in Bessie's evening stories represented
as coming out of a lone ferny dells in the moors, and appearing before the eyes of belated
travellers. I returned to my stool.
Superstition was with me at that moment, but it was not yet her hour for complete victory.
My blood was still warm. The mood of the revolted slave was still bracing me with its bitter
vigour. I had to stem a rapid rush of retrospective thought before I quailed the dismal present.
All John Reed's violent tyrannies and all his sister's proud indifference, all his mother's
aversion, all the servant's partiality, turned up in my disturbed mind like a dark deposit
in a turpid well. Why was I always suffering, always brow-beaten, always accused, forever
condemned? Why could I never please? Why is it useless to try and win anyone's favour?
Eliza, who was headstrong and selfish, was respected. Georgiana, who had a spoiled temper,
a very acrid spite, a capitious and insolent carriage, was universally indulged. Her beauty,
her pink cheeks, and golden curls seemed to give delight to all who looked at her and
to purchase indemnity for every fault. John, no one thwarted, much less punished. Though
he twisted the necks of pigeons, killed the little pea-chicks, set the dogs at the sheep,
stripped the hothouse vines of their fruit, and broke the buds of the choicest plants
in the conservatory. He called his mother old girl, too. Sometimes reviled her for her
dark skin similar to his own. Bluntly disregarded her wishes, not unfrequently tore and spoiled
her silk attire, and he was still her own darling. I dared commit no fault. I strove
to fulfil every duty and was turned naughty and tiresome, sullen and sneaking, from morning
till noon and from noon to night. My head still ached and bled with the blow in the
fall I had received. No one had reproved John for wantonly striking me, and because I had
turned against him to avert farther irrational violence, I was loaded with general approbium.
Unjust, unjust, said my reason, forced by the agonizing stimulus into precocious though
transitory power, and resolve equally wrought up, instigated some strange expedient to achieve
escape from the insupportable oppression, as running away, or if that could not be affected,
never eating or drinking more and letting myself die. What a consternation of soul was
mine that dreary afternoon! How all my brain was in a tumult, and all my heart in insurrection!
Yet, in what darkness, what dense ignorance, was the mental battle fought? I could not
answer the ceaseless inward question why. I thus suffered now. At the distance of how
many years, I see it clearly. I was at discord at Gateshead Hall. I was like nobody there.
I had nothing in harmony with Mrs. Reed or her children or her chosen vassalage. If they
did not love me, in fact, as little as I did love them, they were not bound to regard with
affection a thing that could not sympathize with one amongst them, a heterogeneous thing
opposed to them in temperament and capacity in propensities, a useless thing, incapable
of serving their interests or adding to their pleasure, a noxious thing, cherishing the
germs of indignation at their treatment, of contempt of their judgment. I know that had
I been a sanguine, brilliant, careless, exacting, handsome, romping child, though equally dependent
and friendless, Mrs. Reed would have endured my presence much more complacently. Her children
would have entertained me more of the cordiality of fellow feeling. The servants would have
been less prone to make me the scapegoat of the nursery. Daylight began to forsake the
red room. It was past four o'clock, and the beclouded afternoon was tending to a drear
twilight. I heard the rain still beating continuously on the staircase window, and the wind howling
in the grove behind the hall. I grew by degrees, cold as stone, and then my courage sank. My
habitual mood of humiliation, self-doubt, forlorn depression, fell damp on the embers
of my decaying ear. All said I was wicked, and perhaps I might be so. What thought I
had been but just conceiving of starving myself to death! That certainly was a crime. And
Was I fit to die, or was the vault under the chancel of Gateshead Church an inviting-born?
In such vault I had been told did Mr. Reed lie buried, and led by this thought to recall
his idea, I dwelt on it with gathering dread. I could not remember him, but I knew that
he was my own uncle, my mother's brother, that he had taken me, when I was a parentless
infant, to his house, and that in his last moments he had required a promise of Mrs.
Reed, that she would rear and maintain me as one of her own children. Mrs. Reed probably
considered that she had kept this promise, and so she had, I dare say, as well as her
nature would permit her. But how could she really like an interloper not of her race,
and unconnected with her, after her husband's death by any tie? It must have been most irksome
to find herself bound by a hard-rung pledge to stand in the stead of a parent to a strange
child she could not love, and to see an uncongenial alien permanently intruded on her own family
group.
A singular notion dawned upon me. I doubted not, never doubted, that if Mr. Reed had been
alive he would have treated me kindly. And now I sat looking at the white bed, the overshadowed
walls occasionally also turning a fascinated eye toward the gleaming mirror. I began to
recall what I had heard of dead men troubled in their graves, by the violation of their
last wishes revisited the earth to punish the perjured and avenged the oppressed, and
I thought Mr. Reed's spirit, harassed by the wrongs of his sister's child, might quit
its abode, whether in the church vault or in the unknown world of the departed, and rise
before me in this chamber. I wiped my tears and hushed my sobs, fearful lest any sign
of violent grief might waken a pre-natural voice to comfort me, or elicit from the gloom
some hallowed face bending over me with strange pity.
This idea, consolatory in theory, I felt would be terrible if realized. With all my might
I endeavored to stifle it. I endeavored to be firm. Shaking my hair from my eyes I lifted
my head and tried to look boldly around the dark room. At this moment a light gleamed
on the wall. Was it, I asked myself, a ray from the moon penetrating some aperture in
the blind? No, moonlight was still in this sturd. While I gazed it glided up to the ceiling
and quivered over my head. I can now conjecture readily that this streak of light was in all
likelihood a gleam from a lantern carried by someone across the lawn, but then, prepared
as my mind was for horror, shaken as my nerves were by agitation, I thought the swift darting
beam was a herald of some coming vision from another world. Oh, my heart beat thick. My
head grew hot. A sound filled my ears which I deemed the rushing of wings. Something seemed
near me. I was oppressed, suffocated. Endurance broke down. I rushed to the door and shook
desperate effort. Steps came running from the outer passage. The key turned. Bessie and Abbott
entered. Miss Eyre, are you ill? said Bessie. What a dreadful noise. It quite went through me,
exclaimed Abbott. Take me out. Let me go to the nursery, was my cry. What for are you hurt? Have
you seen something? Again demanded Bessie. Oh, I saw a light and I thought a ghost would come. I
had now got hold of Bessie's hand and she did not snatch it from me. She has screamed on purpose,
declared Abbott in some disgust. And what a scream! If she had been in great pain, one would have
excused it. But she only wanted to bring us all here. I know her naughty tricks. What is all this?
demanded another voice, prematurely. And Mrs. Reed came along the corridor, her cap flying wide,
her gown rustling stormily. Abbott, Bessie, I believe I gave orders that Jane Eyre should
be left in the Red Room till I came to her myself. Oh, Miss Jane screamed so loud, ma'am,
pleaded Bessie. Let her go, was the only answer. Loose Bessie's hand, child. You cannot succeed
in getting out by these means, be assured. I abhor artifice particularly in children.
It is my duty to show you that tricks will not answer. You will now stay here an hour longer,
and it is only on condition of perfect submission and stillness that I shall liberate you then.
Oh, aunt, have pity. Forgive me, I cannot endure it. Let me be punished some other way. I shall
be killed if silence. This violence is most repulsive. And so, no doubt, she felt it.
I was a precocious actress in her eyes. She sincerely looked on me as a compound of virulent
passions, mean spirit, and dangerous duplicity. Bessie and Abbott, having retreated, Mrs. Reed,
impatient of my now frantic anguish and wild sobs, abruptly thrust me back and locked me in without
farther parlay. I heard her sweeping away, and soon after she was gone, I suppose I had a species
of fit. Unconsciousness closed the scene.